# An Exceptional Type Theory in Coq

This plugin allows to automatically translate Coq terms in such a way that
they can now use exceptions. This can be useful for programming, e.g. to allow
failure locally and prove after the fact that assuming a few properties the
translated term does not fail, without endangering reduction as a monadic
translation would do. This can also be used to extend the logical power of Coq
itself, allowing to prove a few semi-classical principles amongst which
independent of premises or Markov's rule.

A draft paper describing the translation can be found
[here](https://www.xn--pdrot-bsa.fr/articles/exceptional.pdf).

# Compilation

This requires Coq trunk. If the `COQBIN` variable is correctly set, a `make`
invokation should be enough.

# Use of the plugin

The plugin adds four new commands which we describe below.

## Effect Translate

```
Effect Translate GLOBAL [using GLOBAL].
```

This command translates the given global definition into the type theory with
exception. The resulting term is parameterized over the type of exceptions used.
It can be restricted to a particular exception type by adding the `using`
clause.

Beware, the resulting theory is inconsistent in general. You need to show
parametricity to ensure consistency, see below.

## Parametricity Translate

```
Parametricity Translate GLOBAL [using GLOBAL].
```

This command automatically proves that the term generated by `Effect Translate`
is parametric and thus does not endanger consistency. All global definitions
used by the original term must have been shown to be parametric for this to
work.

Similarly, the `using` clause can be used to specialize the type of exceptions
used. Generic and instantiated effectful and parametricity terms can be mixed
as long as it makes sense, e.g. it is legal to write
```
Effect Translate foo.
Parametricity Translate foo using bar.
```
or
```
Effect Translate foo using bar.
Parametricity Translate foo using bar.
```
but the following will fail:
```
Effect Translate foo using bar.
Parametricity Translate foo.
```

## Effect Implementation

```
Effect Definition IDENT : TYPE [using GLOBAL].
```

This command opens the proof mode and ask the user to provide a proof of
TYPE in the effectful translation. When the proof is complete, the axiom IDENT
is added to Coq, a term IDENTᵉ is defined with the content of the proof, and
the axiom IDENT is registered to be mapped to IDENTᵉ through the effectful
translation.

## Parametricity Implementation

```
Parametricity Definition GLOBAL [using GLOBAL].
```

This command opens the proof mode and ask the user to provide a proof that
the mentioned global is indeed parametric. When the proof is complete, an
axiom is added to Coq, whose parametricity translation is mapped to the provided
proof.

# Examples

The repository contains a few examples in the `tests` folder.

# Caveat

Sections are not handled.

The translation cannot properly handle the impredicative universe Prop. In the
current implementation, it interprets Prop as Type, and will fail dynamically
with a universe inconsistency if the original proof-term actually relied on
impredicativity.

The translation does not handle primitive records nor universe
polymorphism yet.

The parametric translation is not generic over fixpoints. It can only translate
a well-behaved subset of them and will dynamically fail with a typing error
if not on that fragment. We recommand using the `Parametric Definition` command
to handwrite the proof in that case.

# License

This software is licensed under the WTFPL 2.0.
